ANTONY DAVIES: Myths about the government
debt.
Myth number one, the government owes 20 trillion dollars.
How much is 20 trillion dollars?
Suppose you go to Germany, and in Germany,
you go to every town.
In every town, you visit every store.
In every store, you look at every shelf and
grab everything that is for sale.
The amount of money you spend will not be
$20 trillion.
If you go to Germany and then to France and
you go to every town, and within every town,
you go to every store.
In every store, you look on every shelf and
you buy everything.
You still will not have spent $20 trillion.
You can go to England and while you're there,
you can go to the North Countries and buy
everything that's for sale, and you still
will not have spent $20 trillion.
In fact, to spend $20 trillion, you have to
go to every country in Europe, visit every
town, in every town, go to every store.
In every store, look on every shelf and buy
everything.
And then you will have spent about $20 trillion.
But the myth is that this is how much money
the government owes.
It turns out that there's more, called unfunded
obligations.
Unfunded obligations is money the Federal
Government has promised but which it does
not and will not have the money to pay.
Largely, this consists of promises of retirement
and medical benefits.
If you would take the present value of all
the future promises of retirement and medical
benefits the government has made and subtract
from that the amount of money that's in the
government's Social Security and Medicare
trust funds, and then subtract from that the
amount of money the Federal Government anticipates
collecting under the current law from future
Social Security and Medicare taxes, you will
still have an amount of money left over that
the government does not have.
And that's the unfunded obligations, an amount
of money the government has promised, which
it does not and will not have the money to
pay.
Estimates of unfunded obligations vary from
the astronomical to the unbelievable.
On the low end, people have estimated unfunded
obligations to be about $80 trillion, on the
high end, $200 trillion.
This means that the Federal Government's total
financial obligations range somewhere from
100 to $220 trillion.
Let's say, roughly speaking, the Federal Government
owes about $150 trillion.
Myth number two, the government owes $150
trillion.
Well, it turns out there's more to it.
There are federal agencies that don't appear
on the Federal Government's budget.
There are government-sponsored enterprises
like Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac that don't
appear on the government's financial statements,
and they owe another $8 trillion.
There's then state and local governments that
collectively owe about $3 trillion and have
another 5 trillion in their own unfunded obligations.
When we put it all together, the total US
governmental financial obligations total about
$165 trillion.
Myth number three, government borrowed from
the Social Security trust fund isn't really
debt because we owe it to ourselves.
Well, it turns out there is no ourselves here.
The trust fund belongs to current and future
retirees.
So when people retire and the government does
not have the money that it has promised them,
one of two things must happen.
Either the government must increase taxes
on future workers to pay for the Social Security
and Medicare obligations it has promised,
or the government has to cut the promised
Social Security and Medicare benefits that
it had promised to retirees.
Either way, someone must pay.
Myth number four, the government can't go
bankrupt.
This is technically true because the government
promised to pay back a certain number of dollar
bills.
And so as the government starts to run out
of money, it can simply print more, thereby
satisfying its obligation.
But while that's technically true, it's effectively
false because when the government prints money,
it erodes the purchasing power of dollars,
thereby creating inflation.
For example, suppose you have a bunch of people
and these people buy things.
They buy things from Wal Mart, from Mcdonald's,
and Ford.
In buying these things, they give these businesses
money.
In return, they receive goods and services
from these businesses.
The ratio of the dollars they pay to the goods
and services they receive, we call prices.
We have the average price of a hamburger,
the average price of a pair of shoes, the
average price of a car.
Now, if the government were to print enough
money to double the money supply, we would
have twice as many dollar bills floating around
but the same amount of goods and services.
All that would happen is the prices of these
goods and services themselves would double.
With twice as many dollar bills, a hamburger
now goes from a price of $4 to a price of
8.
The car goes from $30,000 to a price of $60,000.
One of the prices that will double is people's
wages.
Interestingly, you're left with the following.
Under scenario one, without the government
printing money, let's suppose you earn $50,000
a year and the price of a hamburger, shoes,
and a car, things you would buy, are $4, $30,
and $30,000.
And then along comes a government who prints
lots of money, and in printing the money,
it doubles all the prices, including your
income.
So now, in scenario two, you're earning twice
as much as you were before, $100,000, but
the prices of the things you buy have all
doubled as well.
If I ask you, are you better off in scenario
one or scenario two, the answer is you're
the same in both.
It doesn't matter to you whether you're earning
$50,000 and a car costs 30, or whether you're
earning $100,000 and a car costs 60.
It's the same car.
Now, there is a difference in the two scenarios,
and the difference shows up when you look
at your savings.
Let's suppose, in scenario one, you had $10,000
in savings, you're earning $50,000, and a
hamburger costs $4.
Along comes the government, it prints money.
In printing money, all the prices double.
That means that the hamburger now costs twice
as much, the shoes cost twice as much, you're
earning twice as much, but your savings is
the same.
It's the same $10,000 sitting in savings.
What has happened, when the government comes
along and prints money, in effect, what it's
doing is draining away the purchasing power
of your savings.
Economists say it this way, "Inflation is
a tax on savings."
When the government prints money and thereby
creates inflation, we get the same exact effect
as if the government had imposed a tax on
people's savings.
The fact is that the government ultimately
pays for bankruptcy by taxing the purchasing
power of people's savings.
Myth number five, the government can solve
its financial problems by raising taxes.
Well, it turns out the government can't raise
taxes at all, it can only raise tax rates.
Taxes are what happens when the tax rate that
the government impose interacts with people's
behavior.
This is perhaps the most interesting picture
in all of economics.
It's interesting precisely because it's so
boring.
What you're seeing here is federal tax receipts.
This is all tax revenue from all sources combined,
payroll taxes, income taxes, estate taxes,
tariffs, everything, federal taxes, all sources
combined, as a fraction of GDP.
What you see is, from 1950 up to the present,
this has remained relatively stable at about
17%.
That is, over time, if you think of the economy
as a pie, the government has collected a constant
17% slice of this economic pie.
Now, let's superimpose on top of this, for
example, the top marginal income tax rate.
Back in the 1950s, the top marginal income
tax rate was north of 90%.
It dropped in the 1960s, reached an all-time
low during the Reagan years, goes back up
during Bush the first, comes back down, goes
back up again.
This is the top marginal income tax rate.
When you talk about taxing the rich, this
is the rate that applies to the rich.
But notice what happens here.
In years in which we taxed the rich at a very
high rate, the government collected 17% of
the economy as tax revenue.
In years in which we lowered the tax rate
on the rich, the government still collected
17% of the economy as tax revenue.
The same is true of, for example, the capital
gains rate.
When capital gains taxes were particularly
high, the government collected 17% of the
economy as tax revenue.
When capital gains taxes were particularly
low, the government collected 17% of the economy
as tax revenue.
The same is true of the average effective
corporate tax rate.
When corporations paid higher fractions of
their profits to the Federal Government, the
Federal Government collected 17% of the economy
as tax revenue.
When tax rates on corporations were lower,
the government still collected the same 17%
of the economy as tax revenue.
It didn't matter whether we taxed the rich
or capital gains or corporations.
It didn't matter whether we taxed them a high
amount or we taxed them a low amount.
Regardless of what the government has done,
historically, it has consistently collected
the same 17% of the economy as tax revenue.
Now, you might say, "All right, but we're
looking at tax revenue as a fraction of GDP.
Tell me what's happening to tax revenue, straight
up."
Let's look at what happens to tax revenue
as tax rates change.
What you see here is the top marginal income
tax rate.
This is data from 1940 to 2015.
Across the bottom as we move to the right,
we're taxing the rich at a higher rate.
As we move to the left, we're taxing the rich
at a lower rate.
Up and down, we're measuring tax revenue per
person, one year later.
This is total federal tax revenue on a per
capita basis, one year after the tax rate
goes into effect, and this is all adjusted
for inflation.
The story we hear when we hear things like,
"Well, we need more tax revenue so we need
to tax the rich more," implicit in that statement
is as you increase the tax rate on the rich,
we will collect more tax revenue.
But if we actually look at the data, what
we see is a different picture.
The actual data looks like this.
On average, as we have increased the tax rate
on the rich, one year later, the Federal Government
has actually collected, on average, less tax
revenue.
There are exceptions to this but there's also
a very clear trend that the tax revenue moves
in the opposite direction that we think it
should.
This is not just true of the top marginal
income tax rate.
We also see it if we look at the capital gains
tax rate.
Now, the relationship here is not as tight
but it's disturbingly in the same direction.
On average, as the government has increased
the capital gains tax rate, one year later,
it has collected less tax revenue than it
did before.
We see the same phenomenon with the corporate
profits tax.
We see the same thing with the estate tax.
In fact, of all the federal taxes, I'm only
aware of two which, historically, as the government
has increased these tax rates, its tax revenue
has actually gone up.
Those two taxes are Social Security and Medicare.
The disturbing part of this is these are the
taxes that fall most heavily on the poor and
the middle class.
Myth number six, the rich aren't paying their
fair share.
What constitutes a fair share?
What you see here is average market income
of various income groups in the United States
as of 2013.
We have the poorest 20% of Americans at the
top.
Their market income, that is income they earn
from participating in market activities as
opposed to money the government gives them,
their market income is about $15,800 on average.
Here's the middle-income Americans, their
average income is about $53,000, and the top
1%, just over $1.5 million.
Let's ask, what is a fair tax rate for these
people to pay?
As we talk about tax rates, let's talk about
effective tax rates.
What I mean by that is after you have done
all of your legal and accounting gymnastics
and write-offs and deductions and exemptions,
when all that's finished, what fraction of
your income did you end up paying to the IRS?
That's the effective tax rate.
We can argue about what constitutes fair.
A lot of people tend to answer the following
way, the poor should probably pay somewhere
around 2%.
A lot of people think that the middle-class
Americans should pay around 15%.
And a lot of people think that the top 1%
should pay around 30% of their income as taxes.
Now, we could argue about whether these things
are indeed fair but these seem to be numbers
that lots of people will tend to agree with.
Let's look at what these groups actually pay.
If we look at the federal taxes collected
from each of these groups, we see something
like the following.
The average household amongst the poorest
20% of Americans pays, on average, $800 in
federal taxes.
The average middle-income household in the
United States pay about $9,000 in taxes.
The average household amongst the top 1% pays
about half-a-million dollars in federal taxes.
Now, this isn't the end of the story because
we don't just pay money to the Federal Government,
the Federal Government also gives money back.
A lot of this comes in the form of the earned
income tax credit or Social Security benefits
or unemployment compensation, but all of these
things are instances in which the government
has first collected money and then turned
around and given the money back.
Let's account for this, and economists call
this transfers.
Transfers are money the government gives to
people.
The average household amongst the poorest
20% received an average federal transfer of
about $9,600 in 2013.
The average middle-income household received
about $16,700.
The average top 1%-er earned about $800, most
of that is likely coming from Social Security
retirement benefits.
But notice what happens now, if we calculate
the effective tax rate by accounting not just
for what people pay to the government but
for the money the government pays them back,
what we find is something astounding.
We claimed that a fair tax rate for the poorest
Americans is 2%, and a fair tax rate for the
top 1% is 30%.
If we run these numbers, what we find is the
poorest 20%, on average, are actually paying
-56%.
That is, when all the dust settles, they're
actually receiving more money back from the
Federal Government than they paid in the first
place, making their effective tax rate below
zero.
This is true all the way up through middle-income
American.
The average middle-income American is receiving
back 15% more from the Federal Government
than he paid in, the top 1%-er paying about
34%.
Here, we have an interesting conclusion.
On average, and there are exceptions but on
average, only the top 40% are net payers into
the Federal Government.
This raises an interesting point because every
time someone says, "Well, we should cut taxes,"
someone else responds with, "Well, you mean
tax cuts for the rich."
But in fact, our tax system, at least at the
federal level, has become so progressive that
virtually every tax cut, by definition, is
a tax cut for the rich because on average,
those are the only people who are actually
paying.
Myth number seven, the government can settle
its debts by selling off its assets.
The government has some debts and unfunded
obligations of about $150 trillion but it's
also sitting on a bunch of assets, 8,000 tons
of gold in Fort Knox, 500 million acres of
land out in the West and Midwest, and then
miscellaneous assets on top of that.
These total actually only about 2 or $3 trillion.
When we're done, even if the Federal Government
were to sell off all of its assets, we still
have a shortfall of $147 trillion.
Myth number eight, the government needs to
pay off its debts.
The good news here is the government actually
doesn't need to pay off its debt.
Just as a household with a credit card does
not have to pay off the credit card, all it
has to do is keep up with the minimum monthly
payments, so too the government only needs
to keep up with its minimum monthly payments.
We call this servicing the debt.
The bad news is if we count all of the money
the Federal Government owes, $150 trillion,
and the Federal Government currently pays
about 2.5% on its debt, to service the full
$150 trillion of obligations, the Federal
Government would have to come up with $3.8
trillion per year.
That is, to service the debt and obligations
the Federal Government currently has, it would
have to pay $3.8 trillion a year in interest.
Yet, the Federal Government's annual income
is only about 3.3 trillion.
That is, the Federal Government actually is
bankrupt right now.
Even if it were to devote all of the tax revenue
it collects solely to servicing its $150 trillion
in debt and obligations, it still would not
have enough money to service that debt.
Myth number nine, well, the government could
just keep on borrowing.
The problem here is the government has borrowed
so much money that it's running out of places
to find more.
Currently, the American people, state and
local governments have loaned about $6 trillion
to the Federal Government.
Social Security, Medicare, Veterans Benefits
trust funds have loaned about $5 trillion
to the Federal Government.
Foreign governments have loaned another 4
trillion.
The Federal Reserve has loaned 3 trillion,
and foreign people have loaned about 2 trillion.
This is the total amount of money that people
the world over have loaned to the Federal
Government.
The problem with this is Social Security,
Medicare, Veterans Benefits trust funds have
run out of money.
They have no more left to loan to the Federal
Government.
In fact, in the case of Social Security and
Medicare, they're starting to pull back the
money that they had loaned to the Federal
Government, which they now need to turn over
to retirees in the form of benefits.
Foreign governments and foreign people have
been slowing the growth of their lending to
the Federal Government.
The American people, state and local governments
have been slowing, and in some cases, actually
cutting back on how much they loan the Federal
Government.
That means that as time moves forward and
the Federal Government wants to borrow more
and more money and these groups are all tending
to cut back on how much they loan, the one
place left the Federal Government can turn
to for money is the Federal Reserve.
The problem here is when the government borrows
from the Federal Reserve, unlike its borrowing
from any of these other groups, it creates
inflation.
Inflation is a tax on savings.
In effect, as the Federal Government runs
out of places to borrow, it must turn to the
Federal Reserve to borrow money.
When it does that, it creates inflation, which
erodes the purchasing power of all of our
savings.
Myth number 10, there's no way to fix this
problem.
It turns out that there is.
We could have a balanced budget within five
years if we followed this recipe.
First, cut all spending this year by 10%,
no exceptions.
If there's some things you don't want to cut
by 10%, then cut something else by more so
that when you're done, in total, you have
cut by 10%.
When I say cut by 10%, I mean the word in
the way any normal human being uses it.
When politicians say, "Cut the budget," what
they mean is to increase the budget by less
than they would actually like.
This is a actual 10% cut.
We spend 10% less than we did the year before.
Then hold spending constant for four years,
don't even adjust for inflation.
What happens over these four years is as the
government holds its spending constant, the
economy continues to grow.
At the end of the fifth year, the economy
is now large enough that it can support the
government that exists.
At the end of the fifth year, we'll have our
first balanced budget.
Thereafter, the Federal Government can continue
to increase its spending if it likes, provided
that the increase does not outpace the growth
rate of the economy as a whole.
This solution stops the bleeding.
It prevents the debt problem from getting
worse, but it doesn't solve the debt problem.
However, we can grow out of this.
It took perhaps 100 years for our debt problem
to grow to the size it is now.
If we can stop the problem from getting worse,
over the course of the next 50 or 100 years,
the economy will grow enough that the current
$150 trillion debt won't matter.